Rationalised 2023-24
First Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
January 2007, October 2007,
March 2009, December 2009,
January 2011, January 2012,
December 2012, November 2013,
December 2014, December 2015,
December 2016, October 2017,
December 2018, August 2019,
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
PD 300T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006,
2022
` 35.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
/boxshadowdwnNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.
/boxshadowdwnThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
/boxshadowdwnThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means
is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication :Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production :Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business :Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) :Bijnan Sutar
Editor :Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan
Production Assistant :Om Prakash
Illustrations
Bhushan Shaligram
Cover
Shweta RaoPrinted on 80 GSM paper with NCER T
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council
of Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi -
110 016 and printed at Kunal Offset,
Plot No. 364, Road No. 38, G.I.D.C.
Odhav, Ahmedabad - 382 415
(Gujarat)ISBN  81-7450-484-20648 – A P ACT WITH THE SUN
Textbook for Class VI
Rationalised 2023-24
FOREWORD
THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children's life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learn-
ing which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks devel-
oped on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the mainte-
nance of sharp boundaries between dif ferent subject ar eas. W e hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a
child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy of
Education (1986).
The success of this ef fort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage childr en to r eflect on
their own lear ning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must r ecognise that, given space, time and fr eedom, childr en
generate new knowledge by engaging with the infor mation passed
on to them by adults.  Treating the pr escribed textbook as the sole
basis of examination is one of the key r easons why other r esour ces
and sites of lear ning ar e ignor ed.  Inculcating cr eativity and initiative
is possible if we per ceive and tr eat childr en as participants in lear ning,
not as r eceivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school r outines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the r equir ed
number of teaching days ar e actually devoted to teaching. The
methods used for teaching and evaluation will also deter mine how
effective this supplementary r eader pr oves for making childr en’s
life at school a happy experience, rather than a sour ce of str ess or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to addr ess the pr oblem of
curricular bur den by r estructuring and r eorienting knowledge at
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and
the time available for teaching. The book attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small gr oups, and
activities r equiring hands-on experience.
Rationalised 2023-24
iv
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining
(NCER T) appr eciates the har d work done by the textbook development
committee r esponsible for this book. W e wish to thank the Chairperson
of the advisory group in languages, Professor Namwar  Singh  and
the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding
the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this book; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. W e are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their r esour ces, materials and personnel. W e are especially grateful
to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed
by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Pr ofessor G.P . Deshpande for their valuable
time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCER T welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us
to undertake further revision and refinements.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Resear ch and T raining
Rationalised 2023-24
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE
TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce
content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020,
also emphasises reducing the content load and providing
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In
this backgr ound, the NCER T has undertaken the exer cise to
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCER T acr oss classes have been taken
into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view
of the following:
•Content based on genres of literature in the textbooks
and supplementary readers at different stages of school
education
•Content that is meant for achieving Learning Outcomes
for developing language proficiency and is accessible at
different stages
•For reducing the curriculum load and examination stress
in view of the previling condition of the Pandemic
•Content, which is easily accessible to students without
much interventions from teachers and can be learned by
childr en thr ough self-lear ning or peer -learning
•Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after
carrying out the changes given above.
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
A NOTE FOR THE TEACHER
THE main objective of this supplementary reader is to promote among
learners the habit of r eading independently with inter est, under -
standing and enjoyment. It seeks to enable them to read indepen-
dently in the sense that they would not expect the book to be taken
up page by page in the classroom. They would rather read it on
their own and later share and confirm their responses and appre-
ciation with the teacher and the peer group through discussions,
questions and, wherever possible, even role-play.
The book contains ten pieces. Each piece has been divided into
two or thr ee manageable parts, each part briefly summarised in
point for m without r evealing crucial tur ns and twists of the storyline,
thus sustaining r eaders’ curiosity and inter est. This for mat is being
tried to make compr ehension easier and concentration keener . Each
piece is followed by a set of questions as aids to understanding
and, at places, an idea for discussion. The questions may be
attempted orally befor e well-for mulated answers ar e put down on
paper . Discussion on r elated topics should be encouraged so that
learners get an opportunity to go beyond the book and feel inspir ed
to reach hitherto undiscover ed vistas of knowledge and pleasur e.
The stories, amply illustrated, deal with themes of cooperation,
compassion, r espect for elders, sound decision-making, the magic
of music, health, adventur e, peace and social har mony. It is hoped
that lear ners will find the book enjoyable and r ewarding.
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
TEXTBOOK  DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor , English and For eign Languages University
(EFLU), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former  Head , Department of Education
in Languages, NCER T, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Amita Kochar , PGT (English), Chiranjeev Bharati School, Gur gaon
Parminder Dutta, Principal,  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Airports Authority
of India, New Delhi
R. Meganathan, Assistant Pr ofessor , Department of Education
in Languages, NCER T, New Delhi
Shalini Advani, Formerly Principal,  British School, New Delhi
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
Nasiruddin Khan, Former Reader in English,  Department of
Education in Languages, NCER T, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THE National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining is
grateful to Pr ofessor M.L. Tickoo, for merly of the Central Institute
of English and For eign Language s, Hyderabad, and  the Regional
Language Centr e, Singapor e, for going thr ough the manuscript
and making valuable suggestions.
NCER T would like to thank Orient Longman Private Limited,
New Delhi for per mission to r eproduce the following pieces in this
book: ‘What Happened to the Reptiles’ fr om Gul Mohar – Reader 7
and ‘The Old-Clock Shop’ fr om Gul Mohar – Practice Book 6.
Special thanks ar e also due to the Publication Department,
NCER T, for their support. NCER T gratefully acknowledges the
contributions made by Bharati Guleria, Copy Editor , and V ijyanti
and Uttam Kumar , DTP Operators .
Rationalised 2023-24
Foreword ..... iii
Rationalisation of
Content in the Textbooks ..... v
A Note for the Teacher .....  vii
1.A Tale of Two Birds  ..... 1
2.The Friendly Mongoose  ..... 4
3.The Shepher d’s Treasur e ..... 7
4.Tansen  ..... 11
5.The Monkey and the Crocodile  ..... 16
6.The W onder Called Sleep  ..... 21
7.A Pact with the Sun  ..... 24
Rationalised 2023-24
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a)to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b)to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c)to uphold and protect the sovereignty , unity and integrity of India;
(d)to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e)to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f)to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g)to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h)to develop the scientific temper , humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k)who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or , as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note:The Article 51A  containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with ef fect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with ef fect from
1 April 2010).Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Rationalised 2023-24
THERE once lived a bir d and her two new-bor n babies in a
forest. They had a nest in a tall, shady tree and there the
mother bird took care of her little ones day and night.
One day, ther e was a big stor m. Ther e was thunder ,
lightning and rain, and the wind blew down many trees. The
tall tree in which the birds lived also came down. A big, heavy
branch hit the nest and killed the bird. Fortunately for the
baby birds, the strong wind blew them away to the other side
of the forest. One of them came down near a cave where a
gang of robbers lived. The other landed outside a rishi’s
ashram a little distance away.•A mother bird and her two young ones lived in a forest.
•The mother was killed in a stor m and the young bir ds wer e
separated fr om each other .
•Each found a dif ferent home.1 11111A Tale of Two
Birds
Rationalised 2023-24
2/A Pact with the Sun
Days passed and the baby birds became big birds. One
day, the king of the country came to the for est to hunt. He
saw a deer and rode after it. It ran deep into the for est
followed by the king. Soon the king lost his way and didn’t
know wher e he was.
He rode on for a long time till he came to the other side of
the for est. V ery tir ed by now, he got of f his horse and sat
down under a tr ee that stood near a cave. Suddenly he hear d
a voice cry out, “Quick! Hurry up! Ther e’s someone under the
tree. Come and take his jewels and his horse. Hurry , or else
he’ll slip away.” The king was amazed. He looked up and saw
a big, br own bir d on the tr ee under which he was sitting. He
also hear d faint noises issuing fr om the cave. He quickly got
on to his horse and r ode away as fast as he could.
Soon, he came to a clearing which looked like an ashram.
It was the rishi’s  ashram. The king tied his horse to a tr ee
and sat down in its shade. Suddenly he hear d a gentle voice
announce, “W elcome to the ashram, Sir . Please go inside and
rest. The rishi will be back soon. There’s some cold water in
the pot. Please make yourself comfortable.” The king looked
up and saw a big, brown bird in the tree. He was amazed.
‘This one looks like the other bir d outside the cave,’ he said
to himself loudly.
“You ar e right, Sir ,” answer ed the bir d. “He is my br other
but he has made friends with robbers. He now talks as they
do. He doesn’t talk to me any more.” Just then the rishi entered
the ashram.•The king was amazed to hear a similar voice again.
•He came to know the bir ds’ true story.
•He met the rishi who explained the behaviour of each bir d.
Rationalised 2023-24
“Welcome, Sir ,” he said
to the king. “Please come
inside and make yourself
at home. Y ou look tir ed.
Rest for a while. Then you
can share my food.”
The king told the rishi
the story of the two birds
and how each had behaved
so differently though they
looked so alike.  “The forest
is full of surprises”, he said.
The holy man smiled
and said, “After all, one is known by the company one keeps.
That bird has always heard the talk of robbers. He imitates
them and talks about robbing people. This one has repeated
what he has always heard. He welcomes people to the ashram.
Now, come inside and rest. I’ll tell you more about this place
and these birds.”
Questions
1.How did the two baby birds get separated?
2.Where did each of them find a home?
3.What did the first bird say to the stranger?
4.What did the second bird say to him?
5.How did the rishi explain the different ways in which
the birds behaved?
6.Which one of the following sums up the story best?
(i)A bird in hand is worth two in the bush.
(ii)One is known by the company one keeps.
(iii) A friend in need is a friend indeed.A Tale of Two Birds/3
Rationalised 2023-24
4/A Pact with the Sun
ONCE a far mer and his wife lived in a village with their small
son. They loved him very much. “W e must have a pet,” the
farmer said to his wife one day. “When our son grows up, he
will need a companion. This pet will be our son’s companion.”
His wife liked the idea.
One evening, the far mer br ought with him a tiny
mongoose. “It’s a baby mongoose,” said his wife, “but will
soon be fully gr own.  He will be a friend to our son.”•A  far mer, his wife and their small child lived in a village.
•There was also a baby mongoose in the house, who they believed
would be their son’s companion and friend in futur e.
•One day the far mer and his wife went out leaving the child alone
with the mongoose.2The Friendly
Mongoose
Rationalised 2023-24
Both the baby and the mongoose grew. In five or six
months the mongoose had grown to its full size — a lovely
animal with two shining black eyes and a bushy tail. The
farmer’s son was still a baby in the cradle, sleeping and
crying alter nately.
One day, the far mer’s wife wanted to go to the market.  She
fed the baby and rocked him to sleep in his little
cradle.  Picking up the basket, she said to her husband, “I’m
off to the bazar . The baby is sleeping. Keep an eye on him.
Frankly, I don’t like to leave the child alone with the mongoose.”
“You needn’t be afraid,” said the far mer.  “The mongoose
is a friendly animal.  It’s  as sweet as our baby and they ar e
the best of friends, you know.”
The wife went away, and the far mer, having nothing to
do in the house, decided to go out and take a look at his
fields not far away. He ran into some friends on the way
back and didn’t r eturn for quite some time.
•The far mer’s wife r eturned home fr om the market carrying a
heavy basket.
•She found the mongoose at the entrance of the house with blood
on his face and  paws.
•She jumped to the conclusion that it was her son’s blood, and
the mongoose was the guilty one.The Friendly Mongoose/5
The far mer’s wife finished her shopping and came back
home with a basketful of groceries.  She saw the mongoose
sitting outside as if waiting for her . On seeing her he ran to
welcome her , as was customary. The far mer’s wife took one
look at the mongoose and screamed. “Blood!” she cried.  The
face and paws of the mongoose were smeared with blood.
“You wicked animal!  Y ou have killed my baby,” she
screamed hysterically. She was blind with rage and with all
her strength brought down the heavy basket full of groceries
Rationalised 2023-24
6/A Pact with the Sun
Questions
1.Why did the far mer bring a baby mongoose into the
house?
2.Why didn’t the far mer’s wife want to leave the baby alone
with the mongoose?
3.What was the far mer’s comment on his wife’s fears?
4.Why did the far mer’s wife strike the mongoose with her
basket?
5.Did she r epent her hasty action?  How does she show
her r epentance?
Do you have a pet — a cat or a dog?  If not, would you like
one?   How would you look after it?  Ar e you for or against
keeping bir ds in a cage as pets?on the blood-smeared
mongoose and ran inside
to the child’s cradle.
The baby was fast
asleep. But on the floor
lay a black snake tor n
and bleeding. In a flash
she realised what had
happened. She ran out
looking for the mongoose.
“Oh!  Y ou saved my
child! Y ou killed the snake! What have I done?” she cried
touching the mongoose, who lay dead and still, unaware of
her sobbing. The far mer’s wife,  who had acted hastily and
rashly, stared long at the dead mongoose. Then she heard
the baby crying.  Wiping her tears, she went in to feed him.
(a story from The Panchatantra)
Rationalised 2023-24
IN a village in Iran there once lived a shepherd.  He was very
poor.  He did not have even a small cottage of his own.  He
had never been to school or lear nt to r ead and write, for
there wer e very few schools in those days.
Though poor and uneducated, this shepherd was very
wise.  He understood people’s sorrows and troubles, and
helped them face their
problems with courage and
common sense.  Many
people came to him for
advice. Soon he became
famous for his wisdom and
friendly nature. The king of
that country heard about
him, and thought of
meeting him.
Disguised as a shepherd
and riding on a mule, one
day the king came to
the cave where the wise•A poor shepher d once lived in Iran.
•Though uneducated, he was very wise and helpful.
•The king decided to meet him in disguise.3The Shepherd’s
Treasure
Rationalised 2023-24
8/A Pact with the Sun
shepherd lived.  As soon as the shepherd saw the traveller coming
towards the cave, he rose to welcome him.  He took the tired
traveller inside the cave, gave him water to drink and a share of
his own meagre meal.  The king rested for the night in the cave
and was greatly impressed by the shepherd’s hospitality and
wise conversation.
Though still tired, the king decided to depart the next
morning. He said, “Many thanks for your kindness to a poor
traveller . I have a long way to go. Per mit me to leave.”
Looking straight into the eyes of his guest, the shepher d
replied, “Thank you, Y our Majesty, for paying me the
compliment of a visit.”
The king was astonished as well as pleased. ‘He is indeed
very wise.’ he thought to himself. ‘I need people like him to
work for me.’ And the king appointed this humble shepherd
the gover nor of a small district.
Although he r ose to power and dignity, the shepher d
remained as humble as ever . People loved and honour ed
him for his wisdom, sympathy and goodness. He was kind
and just to one and all. His fame as a fair and wise gover nor
soon spr ead thr oughout the country.
Now the gover nors of other pr ovinces gr ew terribly jealous
of him and began to talk to the king against him. They said,
“He is very dishonest, and keeps for himself part of the money
that he collects as tax fr om the people.” Why did he always
carry with him, they added, an ir on chest? Per haps he carried
in it the tr easur e that he had secr etly collected. After all,•The shepherd was able to make out that his visitor was none
other than the king.
•The king made the wise shepher d gover nor of a small district.
•Other gover nors became jealous of the new gover nor and called
him dishonest.
Rationalised 2023-24
they said mockingly, he was an ordinary shepherd and
could behave no better .
At first the king did not pay attention to these r eports,
but how long could he ignor e these gover nors and their
endless stories about the shepher d? One thing was certain,
the king discover ed. The new gover nor did carry an ir on
chest with him all the time.
So, one day, the new gover nor was summoned to the
palace. He came riding on his camel, and to everyone’s
delight, the famous ir on chest was ther e fastened securely
behind him on the camel’s back.
Now the king was angry. He thunder ed, “Why do you
always carry that ir on chest with you? What does it contain?”
The gover nor smiled.
He asked his servant to
bring in the chest. How
eagerly the people stan-
ding ar ound waited for
the shepher d to be found
out! But how gr eat was
their astonishment, and
even of the king himself,
when the chest was
opened! No gold or silver
or jewels but an old
blanket was all that
came out. Holding it up•The new gover nor was called to the palace.
•He was ordered to explain why he always carried an iron chest.
•The chest contained no gold or silver .The Shepherd’s Treasure/9
Rationalised 2023-24
10/A Pact with the Sun
proudly, the shepher d said, “This, my dear master , is my
only tr easur e.  I always carry it with me.”
“But why do you carry such an ordinary blanket with you?
Surely, you ar e the gover nor of a district?” the king asked.
To which the shepher d replied with quiet dignity, “This
blanket is my oldest friend.  It will still pr otect me if, at any
time, Y our Majesty should wish to take away my new cloaks.”
How pleased the king was, and how embarrassed the
jealous gover nors became to hear the wise man’s r eply!  Now
they knew that the shepher d was indeed the humblest and
the wisest man in the land.  The king made him the gover nor
of a much bigger district that very day.
(an Iranian folktale)
Questions
1.The shepher d hadn’t been to school because
(i)he was very poor .
(ii)there wer e very few schools in those days.
(iii)he wasn’t inter ested in studies.
    Choose the right answer .
2.Who visited the shepher d one day, and why?
3.Why did the other gover nors gr ow jealous of the shepher d?
4.Why was the new gover nor called to the palace?
5.Why was everyone delighted to see the ir on chest on the
camel’s back?
6.(i)What did the ir on chest contain?
(ii)Why did the shepher d always carry it?
(iii)Is it an example of the shepher d’s humility or wisdom
or both?
7.How did the king r eward the new gover nor?
Rationalised 2023-24
YOU may have heard the name of Tansen — the greatest
musician our country has pr oduced.
A singer called Mukandan Misra and his wife lived in
Behat near Gwalior . Tansen was their only child. It is said
that he was a naughty child. Often, he ran away to play in
the for est, and soon lear nt to imitate per fectly the calls of
birds and animals.•Tansen was the only child of his parents.
•Naughty but talented, he imitated the calls of birds and
animals perfectly.
•Once he tried to frighten a group of travellers by roaring
like a tiger .
Rationalised 2023-24
12/A Pact with the Sun
A famous singer named Swami Haridas was once travelling
through the for est with his disciples. T ired,
the group settled down to rest in a shady grove. Tansen
saw them.
‘Strangers in the forest! ’ he said to himself. ‘It will be fun to
frighten them ’. He hid behind a tr ee and r oared like a tiger .
The little gr oup of travellers scatter ed in fear but Swami
Haridas called them together . “Don’t be afraid,” he said. “T igers
are not always danger ous. Let us look for this one.”
Suddenly, one of his men saw a small boy hiding behind
a tree. “Ther e are no tigers her e, master ,” he said. “Only this
naughty boy.”
•Tansen lear nt music fr om Swami Haridas for eleven years.
•He stayed with a holy man called Mohammad Ghaus.
•He married Hussaini, one of the ladies in the court of
Rani Mrignaini.
Swami Haridas did not punish him. He went to Tansen’s
father and said, “Y our son is very naughty. He is also very
talented. I think I can make him a good singer .”
Tansen was ten years old when he went away with Swami
Haridas. He lived with him for eleven years, lear ning music,
and became a gr eat singer . At about this time, his par ents
died. Mukandan Misra’s dying wish was that T ansen should
visit Mohammad Ghaus of Gwalior . Mohammad Ghaus was a
holy man. Mukandan Misra had long been devoted to him,
and often visited him. While living in Gwalior with Mohammed
Ghaus, T ansen was often taken to the court of Rani Mrignaini,
who was a gr eat musician herself. Ther e he met and married
one of the ladies of the court. Her name was Hussaini.
Hussaini also became Swami Haridas’s disciple. T ansen
and Hussaini had five childr en who wer e all very musical.
Rationalised 2023-24
Tansen had, by this time, become very famous. Sometimes
he sang befor e Emper or Akbar , who was so impr essed by
him that he insisted Tansen should join his court.
•Tansen became a favourite in Akbar’s court.
•Once he was asked to sing Raga Deepak.
•Tansen asked his daughter and her friend to sing Raga Megh
after Raga Deepak to counteract the ef fect of the latter .
Tansen went to Akbar’s court in 1556, and soon became
a great favourite of the Emper or. Akbar would call upon
Tansen to sing at any time during the day or night. Quite
often he would just walk into T ansen’s house to hear him
practise. He also gave him many pr esents. Some of the
courtiers became jealous of T ansen. “W e shall never be able
to rest till T ansen is ruined,” they declar ed. One of the
courtiers, Shaukat Mian, had a bright idea.
“Let us make him sing Raga Deepak”, he said.
“How will that help us?” asked another man.
“If Raga Deepak is pr operly sung, it makes the air so hot
that the singer is bur nt to ashes. T ansen is a very good singer .
If he sings Raga Deepak, he will die, and we will be rid of him.”
Shaukat Mian went to Akbar and said, “W e don’t think
Tansen is a gr eat singer . Let us test him. T ell him to sing
Raga Deepak. Only the gr eatest singers can sing it pr operly.”
“Of course he can sing it. T ansen can sing anything”.
Akbar said. T ansen was afraid, but could not disobey the
king. “V ery well, my lor d,” he said, “but give me time to
prepare myself.” T ansen went home. He had never been mor e
downcast and unhappy. “I can sing the Raga,” he told his
wife, “but the heat it gives of f will not only set the lamps
alight, it will also bur n me to ashes.”Tansen/13
Rationalised 2023-24
14/A Pact with the Sun
Then he had an idea. “If someone sings Raga Megh at the
same time, and sings it pr operly, it will bring rain. Per haps
our daughter , Saraswati, and her friend, Rupvati, could do
it,” he said.
He taught the two girls to sing Raga Megh. They practised
night and day for two weeks. T ansen told them, “Y ou must
wait till the lamps start bur ning, and then you start singing. ”
The legend goes that on the appointed day the whole town
assembled to hear T ansen sing Raga Deepak. When he began
to sing, the air became war m. Soon people in the audience
were bathed in perspiration. The leaves on the tr ees dried
up and fell to the gr ound. As the music continued, bir ds fell
dead because of the heat and the water in the rivers began•Both Ragas wer e sung accor ding to plan.
•Akbar punished Tansen’s enemies.
•Tansen died in 1585.
Rationalised 2023-24
Questions
1.Why did Swami Haridas say Tansen was ‘talented’?
2.Why did Akbar ask Tansen to join his court?
3.How do we know that Akbar was fond of Tansen?  Give
two reasons.
4.What did the other courtiers feel about Tansen?
5.(i)What happens if Raga Deepak is sung properly?
(ii)Why did T ansen’s enemies want him to sing the Raga?
6.Why did T ansen agr ee to sing Raga Deepak?
7.(i)What steps did he take to save himself?
(ii)Did his plan work? How?
Are you inter ested in music? Do you like classical music?
Name a few distinguished Indian musicians.to boil. People cried out in terror as flames shot up out of
nowher e and lighted the lamps.
At once Saraswati and Rupvati began to sing Raga Megh.
The sky clouded over and the rain came down. T ansen was
saved. The story goes that he was very ill after this, and
Akbar was sorry that he had caused him so much suf fering.
He punished T ansen’s enemies. When T ansen got well, the
entire city r ejoiced. T ansen r emained Akbar’s court singer
till 1585 when he died. He composed several new ragas.
Tansen’s tomb is in Gwalior . It is a place of pilgrimage for
musicians.Tansen/15
Rationalised 2023-24
16/A Pact with the Sun
ONCE, on the bank of a river , a monkey made a home for
himself in a tree laden with fruit. He lived in it happily eating
to his heart’s content the fruit of his choice.
The monkey was happy but lonely and wanted a
companion to talk to and shar e the fruits with.  But ther e
was no one ar ound, not even another monkey, till one day a
crocodile appeared on the riverside.
“Hello, there,” said the monkey.  “Do you live in this river?
Would you like to eat some fruit?”
“Good mor ning,” r eplied the cr ocodile politely.  “I did come
here in search of food for myself and my wife.  Nice of you to
offer me fruit.”•A monkey lived in a fruit tr ee on the bank of a river .
•He made friends with a crocodile, gave him delicious fruits to
eat and sent some for his wife.
•They met regularly and talked — the monkey in the tree and
the crocodile on the ground.
Rationalised 2023-24
The monkey plucked some from the nearest branch and
threw them down. The crocodile found them delicious.
“Thanks,” he said. “May I have some on my next visit?”
“Certainly, as many as you like and some for your wife
too,” said the monkey. “Do come again. I’m rather lonely here”.
The crocodile visited the monkey regularly and ate the
fruits which his host threw down. He took some home for his
wife. The monkey and the crocodile were now the best of
friends. They talked and were never tired of talking. They
talked about birds and animals, about the villages nearby
and the difficulties villagers faced in raising good crops
for lack of rain.
One day, the crocodile stayed with the monkey longer than
usual. His wife was annoyed waiting and waiting managing
the little crocodiles that had just been hatched. She said,
“Who is this friend of yours you are so fond of?”
“Oh, he is a very nice monkey,” he replied. “He lives on a
fruit-tr ee. He sends fruits for you everyday. Y ou don’t expect
me to climb trees, do you?”
“A nice monkey, I’m sure,” replied the wife with obvious
sarcasm. “If you ask me, this monkey should be my food. I
want to eat his heart so much.”
“What a foolish thing to say!” shouted the crocodile. “I
can’t kill a friend, though I won’t mind a monkey occasionally
for a change of taste.”
“You bring him her e,” ordered the wife. “I want to see him.”
“So you can eat him. Never!” declared her husband.•The crocodile’s wife was annoyed because her husband came
home late.
•She didn’t like his friendship with the monkey.
•The crocodile couldn’t altogether ignore his wife’s wishes.The Monkey and the Crocodile/17
Rationalised 2023-24
18/A Pact with the Sun
His wife was furious and she dived in to hide herself at the
bottom of the river leaving the little ones to pester their father .
The crocodile was in a serious dilemma. He loved his wife
and was very fond of his friend too.  Finally, he decided to be
on the side of his wife.  She was his life-partner after all.  ‘I
know it’s a sin to betray a friend, but I have no choice,’ he
said to himself.  ‘I’ll invite the monkey home and hope
for the best.’
“My wife wants you over for a meal, dear friend,” said the
crocodile when he visited the monkey next.  “Y ou must come
home with me today.”
“With pleasur e,” said the monkey.  “I’m no swimmer , but
can ride on your back.”  And they set out.
In the middle of the river , where the curr ent was the
strongest, the cr ocodile could no longer hide his intention.
“Sorry, my friend,” he said hesitatingly, “but I have to go
under water now.  I’ve br ought you her e to kill you.  My wife
cannot survive without eating your heart.  Good bye.”
Rationalised 2023-24
The monkey was scared and distressed. But he was sensible
and clever like all monkeys. He kept a cool head. Calmly he
said, “I’d do anything for you and your family. Y ou are my only
friend. After all, what is a monkey’s heart compared with the life
of a crocodile’s wife? But how foolish could you be? Why didn’t
you tell me before? I’d have brought my heart along.”
“But where is your heart?” asked the crocodile innocently.
“I thought you carried it all the time.”
“Of course not. It’s there on the tree. Let’s swim back at
once and get it. Y our wife must be waiting,” r eplied the monkey
gaining confidence.
“Oh dear! What a mistake!” hissed the crocodile. They laughed
loudly as the cr ocodile took a full tur n to reach the tr ee.
•The monkey was thunderstruck.  He knew his life was in danger .
•He kept his cool and persuaded the crocodile on a pretext to
swim back to the tree.
•He decided then to discontinue his friendship with the crocodile.The Monkey and the Crocodile/19
Rationalised 2023-24
20/A Pact with the Sun
Questions
1.The monkey was happy living in the fruit tree, but his
happiness was not complete. What did he miss?
2.What did the two friends generally talk about?
3.Why was the crocodile’s wife annoyed with her husband
one day?
4.Why was the crocodile unwilling to invite his friend
home?
5.What did the crocodile tell the monkey midstream?
6.How did the monkey save himself?
7.What does the last sentence of the story suggest? What
would the crocodile tell his wife?
On the river-bank, the monkey
jumped on to the tree and heaved a
deep sigh of relief. He plucked a fruit
or two from the nearest branch and
throwing them down said, “Let your
wife have some fruit rather than my
heart. Fresh fruits are good for mind
and body. Good bye, friend, and if you
don’t mind, we won’t meet again.”
The cr ocodile, sadder and wiser , shed
a few tears which were genuine and
turned back to go home. He was in a
hurry to tell his wife a thing or two.
(a story from The Panchatantra)
Rationalised 2023-24
WE know enough about what sleep is, though we don’t know
what exactly causes sleep. Sleep is a state of rest — an
unconscious rest. When we sleep, our body recovers from
fatigue caused by the day’s activities. After a good sleep and
the rest that it gives, we
become alert and active
again, r eady for the nor mal
activities of the day.
When we wake up in
the mor ning, it is not
always possible for us to
remember what hap-
pened when we were
asleep. W e may r emember
a dream but the rest of
our sleep was a kind of
darkness in which
nothing seems to have
taken place.•Our body and brain recover from fatigue after a good sleep.
•We dream while sleeping, but we do not always r emember
our dreams.
•During sleep, our heartbeat becomes slower and our temperature
and blood pressure go down.
Rationalised 2023-24
22/A Pact with the Sun
Several things happen to our body while we are sleeping.
As we sink deeper into sleep, our muscles relax more and
more. Our heartbeat becomes slower . Our temperatur e and
blood pr essur e go down. The ever -active brain also slows
down so that we can’t think or act consciously. But we dream.
When we wake up, our temperature and blood pressure
rise to nor mal. Our heartbeat and br eathing also become
normal and we ar e fully awake, and have for gotten most, if
not all, the dr eams that we had while sleeping.
What is a dream? It is an activity of the mind that takes
place when we are asleep. Some dreams are probable
while others are not. That only means that many of the
things that happen in dreams could happen when we are
awake. Others could not.  Dreams seem to be important
for several reasons. One is that a dream can help us to
sleep through noise or other disturbances. For example,
the alar m clock rings, but our mind causes us to dr eam
that the telephone or doorbell is ringing, and that we are
awake and answering it.
Certain doctors have found that one’s dreams often reveal a
great deal about one’s problems and that, if understood correctly,
they can provide a key to the solution of those problems. But
we must remember one thing. Dreams cannot be used as a way
to tell the future. They simply can never tell the future.
Sleep is the most common experience, but how many of
us really think about the wonder and power of sleep? Many•A dream is an activity of the mind when we are asleep.
•Dreams help us sleep through noise and other disturbances.
•Dreams may reveal something about one’s problems, but they
cannot tell the future.
Rationalised 2023-24
Questions
1.What is the most obvious advantage of sleep?
2.What happens to our body when we sleep?
3.Define a dream in your own words.
4.Why are dreams important? Mention two reasons.
5.Why has sleep been called a wonder?
6.Describe briefly to the class an improbable dream you
have ever had.
Grandmothers and mothers sing nice little songs while
rocking little ones to sleep.  Such a song is called a ‘lullaby’.
Do you remember a lullaby in your own language?  Tell the
class in English what the lullaby says.poets have written beautiful poems about sleep.  Here is one
in which the poet is describing the experience of falling asleep.
Read it aloud.
I have come to the bor ders of sleep,
The unfathomable deep
Forest wher e all must lose
Their way, however straight,
Or winding, soon or late;
They cannot choose.
There is not any book
Or face of dear est look
That I would not tur n from now
To go into the unknown
I must enter and leave alone
I know not how.
EDWARD THOMASThe Wonder  Called Sleep/23
Lights Out
Rationalised 2023-24
24/A Pact with the Sun
SAEEDA ’S mother had been ailing for a long time —fever, cough,
body-ache, painful joints and what not. T reated by a variety
of physicians for weeks, she often showed signs of
improvement but soon r elapsed into her old, sick self, one
complaint substituted by another . Though weak and
colourless, she was forbidden nor mal food and was under
strict or ders to r emain perpetually confined to her small,
dingy r oom with doors and windows fastened, deprived of
sunshine and fr esh air .
•Saeeda’s mother has not received proper medical treatment
for her complaints.
•She is denied healthy food, sunshine and fr esh air .
•At last, she consults a good physician who gives her effective
medicine and sound advice.
Rationalised 2023-24
When she became critical, her relatives and neighbours
persuaded her to consult a specialist even though his fee
was likely to be high. Life is more precious than money, they
said. Saeeda’s mother was poor but she heeded their advice
and sold a few trinkets to pay the doctor’s fee and the
cost of medicine.
The doctor came in a few days and examined her and
prescribed effective but costly medicine. To the question as
to what she should eat he said, “Anything you wish to eat —
chapati, vegetables, milk, fruits, etc. In addition to all this,”
he added emphatically, “leave this dark hovel and occupy a
bigger room with doors and windows open. Sit in the sun
every mor ning fr om eight to nine. Sunshine and fr esh air ,” he
concluded, “are more important than medicine.”
The doctor and his advice became a subject of noisy
commentary among all present. Some favoured while others
opposed it. Exposure to sun and air for someone afflicted with
chronic cough was dangerous, an experienced lady declared. A
younger neighbour nearly quarrelled with her over this. Too
exhausted to participate in the debate, Saeeda’s mother
remained quiet but deter mined to follow the doctor’s advice.
“Forget the consequences,” she said at last. “I’ll carry out his
instructions to the letter . Move my bed into the next r oom and
let me sit in the sun on my charpoy for an hour daily .”
It so happened that the sky remained overcast next
morning. The same was the case the following day. Saeeda’s•The sky remains overcast with clouds for a few days.
•Saeeda makes a special request to the sunrays to help her
mother get well.
•The sunrays keep their word, come down in large numbers
and give new life to Saeeda’s mother .A Pact with the Sun/25
Rationalised 2023-24
26/A Pact with the Sun
mother was dejected. She muttered, “O Lord of mine, why
have you ordered the sun to remain hidden? How will I
ever be cured?”
Saeeda was playing with her doll nearby and she heard
her mother’s lament but kept calm. Later in the after noon,
when she stumbled on a spot of pale sunshine in the
courtyard, she ran to her mother to say the sun was there.
“No, no”, said everybody pr esent. “It’s too late and chilly. Y our
mother can’t sit out ther e.” Disheartened, Saeeda r eturned
to her doll. There was no sun really except for its last remnant
entangled in the top branches of the family mango tree.
Now, children have at their command a secret language,
foreign to gr own-ups altogether , in which they fluently
communicate with trees, flowers, animals, the sun and the
moon, perhaps even with the Almighty. Using that special
language, Saeeda addressed her remark to the last departing
ray of the sun. “Dear est sister , do come tomorr ow with lots of
warmth and brightness. Y ou see, my mother is ill and needs
your help.”
“Surely,” answered the light,
“don’t look unhappy. W e’ll be her e
at the fixed hour .”
Next day, early in the mor ning,
when the sprightly sunrays
embellished themselves for their
journey down to earth, the sun said,
“It’s our day of f again. W e’re staying
up here. The road to earth is
blocked by an ar my of thick, mucky
clouds.” The little rays so much
wanted to go down for a lark but
they remained quiet. One of them,
though, who had made a pact with
Rationalised 2023-24
A Pact with the Sun/27
little Saeeda said, “Sir , I can’t stay back. I’ve given my wor d
to Saeeda whose mother is ill and needs our help. I’ll pierce
through the clouds to reach Saeeda’s courtyard. How else
will her mother be cured?” Hearing this, all the rays nearly
staged a r evolt against their father , the sun. “Fancy staying
back again,” they said in a single voice. “What will the people
of the earth say about us? That we of the heavens have
turned liars?”
The sun relented. “Please yourselves,” he said. “Mind your
clothes, though. The clouds are mucky.”
“Never mind our clothes. W e can always change. But go
we must.” And the rays rushed towards the earth. The clouds
stood guard between them and Saeeda’s courtyard. The little
rays focussed their heat — and they had enough of it — on a
battalion of clouds, which had to flee from its post. The rays
got through, shooting past the bewildered clouds. They were
already late.
Rationalised 2023-24
28/A Pact with the Sun
Saeeda saw the whole host of them approaching and her
heart leapt with joy. She shouted, “ Amma , Amma ! The sun is
here. Come out.” The old lady’s eyes welled up with tears of
gratitude. Her c harpoy  was placed in the courtyard and she sat
on it for an hour reclining against bolsters. It had been months
since she had felt the sun on her hands and face and breathed
in fresh air . She thought she was in a new world. Though pale,
her face glowed and her eyes shone bright. She saw her child
too bathed in sunlight and kissed her . The mor ning air br ought
in a new fragrance from nearby flowers. The birds chanted a
new tune. Saeeda’s mother felt better already.
She is fully recovered now, but she still follows the doctor’s
advice — an hour of sunlight and lungfuls of fresh air every day.
ZAKIR HUSAIN
[translated from the Urdu and
slightly modified]
Questions
1.What did the physicians ask Saeeda’s mother to do to
get well? Did their advice help her? If not, why?
2.What did the specialist prescribe in addition to
medicine?
3.What did Saeeda tell the sunrays to do?
4.Why were the sunrays keen to go down to the earth the
next day?
/circle6What is your own formula for keeping good health?
/circle6Who would you recommend to a patient in your
neighbourhood — the physicians contacted first or the
specialist contacted next?  Give reasons for your choice.
/circle6When would you make a pact with the sun?  When you
are going on a picnic, or when you are playing a cricket
match?  Think of other occasions.
Rationalised 2023-24
